Normative language improvements (#158)
AMWA-TV/nmos-discovery-registration: docs/2.5. APIs - Query Parameters.md

Query API clients MUST detect whether pagination is being used by examining the HTTP response headers for 'X-Paging-Limit' which MUST be returned in all cases where pagination is in use.

The registry which backs the Query API SHOULD maintain a 'creation' and 'update' timestamp alongside each registered resource. These values SHOULD NOT be returned to API clients in the response body, but will be made available via headers and used as pagination cursors.

> To ensure that pagination does not result in resources being skipped, there SHOULD NOT be duplicate creation or update timestamps stored against resources of the same type (Node, Source, Flow etc). It is RECOMMENDED that these timestamps are stored with nanosecond resolution using a TAI timebase, which will allow clients to navigate collections based on a common understanding of time.

Reviewer: While we're here...

```suggestion
To ensure that pagination does not result in resources being skipped, there SHOULD NOT be duplicate creation or update timestamps stored against resources of the same type (Node, Source, Flow, etc.). It is RECOMMENDED that these timestamps are stored with nanosecond resolution using a TAI timebase, which will allow clients to navigate collections based on a common understanding of time.
```

> The choice to page based on 'creation' or 'update' timestamp SHOULD depend on the client's intended use of the data:

Reviewer: Is this stating a recommendation?

Author: On reflection this can go back to being a suggestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice to page based on 'creation' or 'update' timestamp depends on the client's intended use of the data:
```

Reviewer: Done

- Paging based on 'creation' time from the start of a collection provides the best mechanism to identify all resources held in a registry.
- Paging based on 'update' time from the end of a collection provides the best mechanism to watch for changing resources in the case that WebSocket subscriptions are not available.

> Paging through a collection for a second time, using the same cursors as previously SHOULD NOT result in new data appearing in the response payloads when using 'creation' ordering, provided the requested paging times are less than or equal to the maximum paging time held in the registry. However, note that as the registry is dynamic and resources MAY be updated or deleted a given cursor MAY return fewer results than it did previously. When using 'update' ordering and a query filter, new data MAY appear when cursors are used for a second time.

Reviewer: This is a little awkward because the sentence seems to begin from the point of view of the _client_, but the "SHOULD NOT" as a recommendation is addressing the _server_.

The instances of "may" in the second sentence were also really stating fact from the point of view of the client; as conformance language most of them apply to the server, so again, a bit awkward.

```suggestion
Paging through a collection for a second time, using the same cursors as previously SHOULD NOT result in new data appearing in the response payloads when using 'creation' ordering, provided the requested paging times are less than or equal to the maximum paging time held in the registry. However, note that as the registry is dynamic and resources could be updated or deleted a given cursor MAY return fewer results than it did previously. When using 'update' ordering and a query filter, new data MAY appear when cursors are used for a second time.
```

When query parameters which perform filtering are used at the same time as paging, the filters MUST be applied by the implementation before applying paging parameters to the resulting data set.

A server MAY choose its own default value for paging limit (see Example 1).

Where both 'since' and 'until' parameters are specified, the 'since' value takes precedence where a resulting data set is constrained by the server's value of 'limit' (see Example 5).

> Servers SHOULD include 'prev' and 'next' Link headers and MAY include 'first' and 'last' Link headers in all responses.

Reviewer: 'first' and 'last' are optional but dead easy... first = `paging.since=0:0`, last = omit `paging.since` and `paging.until`

Reviewer: Done

### Examples

The following examples show pagination for a set of registered data. In order to avoid displaying full resource representations, the only data listed here is the 'update' timestamp associated with each registered record. The same procedures can be applied where 'creation' timestamps and the '?paging.order=create' parameter are used instead.

Where a paging limit is not specified in a request the server's default is used.

**Sample Data: Registered Node Update Timestamps (Comma-Separated)**

> ```json

Reviewer: This example is not JSON (even though it has `[` and `]` to indicate an array).

Given that the suggestion would be to just to go back to three back-ticks, it's impossible to write!!

Or quote the timestamps?
Or accept that it's not valid JSON?
Hmmm...

Author: Well at least at the moment the linter doesn't check this sort of thing so lets leave it as pseudo-json for now

Reviewer: Agreed.

[0:1, 0:2, 0:3, 0:4, 0:5, 0:6, 0:7, 0:8, 0:9, 0:10, 0:11, 0:12, 0:13, 0:14, 0:15, 0:16, 0:17, 0:18, 0:19, 0:20]
```

Each of the above corresponds to the update timestamp of a corresponding Node, in the format &lt;seconds&gt;:&lt;nanoseconds&gt; and displayed in ascending order. These will be used throughout the following examples.

> Response payloads in the examples will show these values, but in a real implementation SHOULD be replaced by the corresponding JSON objects for the Nodes or other resources being queried.

Reviewer: If this were conformance language it would have to be MUST, which would look like a substantive change, so I suggest:

```suggestion
Response payloads in the examples will show these values, but in a real implementation would be replaced by the corresponding JSON objects for the Nodes or other resources being queried.
```

Author: Agreed. i thought that someone would say this when i wrote it.

**Example 1: Initial /nodes Request**

In this example there are no query parameters used in the request, but as the Query API supports pagination it returns a subset of the results with headers identifying how to page further into the collection.

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes
```

***Response***

Headers

```http
Link: <http://example.api.com/x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes/?paging.since=0:20&paging.limit=10>; rel="next", <http://example.api.com/x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes/?paging.until=0:10&paging.limit=10>; rel="prev"
X-Paging-Limit: 10
X-Paging-Since: 0:10
X-Paging-Until: 0:20
```

Payload Resources

> ```json

Reviewer: Again, not JSON, but should have same resolution as above.

```

***Notes***

- The data set returned when no query parameters are specified MUST be from the most recently updated (or created) resources in the collection, returned in descending order.

> - The X-Paging headers identify properties of the collection of data returned in the response. These parameters MAY be used to construct a URL which would return the same set of bounded data on consecutive requests (for example /x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes?paging.since=0:10&paging.until=0:20).

Author: ```suggestion
- The X-Paging headers identify properties of the collection of data returned in the response. These parameters can be used to construct a URL which would return the same set of bounded data on consecutive requests (for example /x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes?paging.since=0:10&paging.until=0:20).
```

> - The Link header identifies the 'next' and 'prev' cursors which an application MAY use to make its next requests. An implementation MAY also provide 'first' and 'last' cursors to identify the beginning and end of a collection if this can be addressed via a consistent URL.

Reviewer: Not sure if that first "MAY" is really a normative requirement, it might be better as "could" or "can"?

Author: It's not really about granting permission so "can" better.

Reviewer: This conversation was marked as resolved, but I don't see an actual commit or suggestion to change 'MAY' to 'can'? Let's discuss this one tomorrow.

> - The Link header identifies the 'next' and 'prev' cursors which an application MAY use to make its next requests. An implementation MAY also provide 'first' and 'last' cursors to identify the beginning and end of a collection if this can be addressed via a consistent URL.

Reviewer: As mentioned above, the 'first' and 'last' cursors can always be provided by consistent URLs.

Reviewer: Done

**Example 2: Request With Custom Limit**

This request is similar to Example 1, but the client has chosen to use a custom page size limit.

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes?paging.limit=5
```

***Response***

Headers

```http
Link: <http://example.api.com/x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes/?paging.since=0:20&paging.limit=5>; rel="next", <http://example.api.com/x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes/?paging.until=0:15&paging.limit=5>; rel="prev"
X-Paging-Limit: 5
X-Paging-Since: 0:15
X-Paging-Until: 0:20
```

Payload Resources

> ```json

Reviewer: Same

```

***Notes***

- In this case the server has accepted the client's paging size limit request. If the client had requested a page size which the server was unable to honour, the actual page size used would be returned in X-Paging-Limit.

**Example 3: Request With Since Parameter**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes?paging.since=0:4
```

***Response***

Headers

```http
Link: <http://example.api.com/x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes/?paging.since=0:14&paging.limit=10>; rel="next", <http://example.api.com/x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes/?paging.until=0:4&paging.limit=10>; rel="prev"
X-Paging-Limit: 10
X-Paging-Since: 0:4
X-Paging-Until: 0:14
```

Payload Resources

> ```http

Reviewer: This should be `json` or whatever is consistent with the array response examples above.

> ```http

Author: ```suggestion
```json
```

```

***Notes***

- Whilst both 'since' and 'until' are specified, as this server example has a default paging limit of '10', the 'since' parameter  takes precedence. As a result of this the value of X-Paging-Until is lower than requested and a further request MUST be made to retrieve any remaining data.

### Edge Cases

> When a client requests data which falls at the extreme ends of the stored data set it can be less clear what values SHOULD be returned in the 'X-Paging-Limit' and 'X-Paging-Since' headers. The following examples are intended to clarify these cases.

Reviewer: This doesn't read like a requirement, how about:
```suggestion
When a client requests data which falls at the extreme ends of the stored data set it can be less clear what values ought to be returned in the 'X-Paging-Limit' and 'X-Paging-Since' headers. The following examples are intended to clarify these cases.
```

Author: ...ought to be..." a bit of a strange construction for non-native speakers. What about "...are expected to be...

Reviewer: Agreed

> When a client requests data which falls at the extreme ends of the stored data set it can be less clear what values SHOULD be returned in the 'X-Paging-Limit' and 'X-Paging-Since' headers. The following examples are intended to clarify these cases.

Author: ```suggestion
When a client requests data which falls at the extreme ends of the stored data set it can be less clear what values are expected to be returned in the 'X-Paging-Limit' and 'X-Paging-Since' headers. The following examples are intended to clarify these cases.
```

Reviewer: Done

### Invalid Examples

**Invalid Example 1: Duplicate Query Parameters**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.0/flows?tags.location=Salford&tags.location=London
```

***Response***

- This query specifies two matching query parameters with different values. As different programming frameworks might not make both of these values available, this is an invalid query for which the response is not defined and might vary by implementation. The next section provides a means of achieving the desired query.

## Advanced (RQL) Queries (OPTIONAL)

Query APIs MAY support Resource Query Language (RQL, <https://github.com/persvr/rql/>) queries against their API resources where the `rql` trait is specified in the RAML documentation. A `501` (Not Implemented) HTTP status code MUST be returned where an RQL query is attempted using RQL functions or operators which are not supported by a Query API.

RQL SHOULD be formatted in the normalised form as opposed to using FIQL syntax, and passed via the query string using a `query.rql=...` query parameter.

> Querying within objects and arrays SHOULD be performed as in the Basic Queries case by using the `.` separator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Querying within objects and arrays is performed as in the Basic Queries case by using the `.` separator.
```

**Example 2: Downgrade From v1.1 to v1.0**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/nodes?query.downgrade=v1.0
```

***Response***

- Returns all Nodes held in the registry which match the v1.1 schema.
- Returns Nodes with versions greater than or equal to v1.2, and less than v2.0. These Nodes MUST have all non-v1.1 keys stripped by the Query API before they are returned.
- Returns all Nodes which are registered in v1.0 format.

**Example 3: Downgrade From v1.3 to v1.1**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.3/flows?query.downgrade=v1.1
```

***Response***

- Returns all Flows held in the registry which match the v1.3 schema.
- Returns Flows with versions greater than or equal to v1.4, and less than v2.0. These Flows MUST have all non-v1.3 keys stripped by the Query API before they are returned.
- Returns all Flows which are registered in v1.2 or v1.1 format.

### Invalid Examples

**Invalid Example 1: Downgrade Between Major API Versions**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v3.0/flows?query.downgrade=v1.0
```

***Response***

> - Returns an HTTP 400 error code as downgrade queries MUST NOT be performed between major API versions.

Reviewer: Agreed; "may not" meant "MUST NOT" :-)

## Basic Queries

Query APIs SHOULD support basic queries against their API resources. A 501 HTTP status code MUST be returned where a basic query is attempted against a Query API which does not implement it.

> Basic queries make use of standard HTTP GET query parameters in the form '?key1=value1&key2=value2'. Keys MAY match any attribute which the API schemas indicate could be returned by a given resource.

Reviewer: This doesn't read quite right. This could be "MUST" (or "SHOULD" given the following sentence)? Or not use conformance language?

Author: As the first sentence in this para states a fact we can do the same for the second sentence.

> Basic queries make use of standard HTTP GET query parameters in the form '?key1=value1&key2=value2'. Keys MAY match any attribute which the API schemas indicate could be returned by a given resource.

Author: ```suggestion
Basic queries make use of standard HTTP GET query parameters in the form '?key1=value1&key2=value2'. Keys match any attribute which the API schemas indicate could be returned by a given resource.
```

Reviewer: Done

## Advanced (RQL) Queries (OPTIONAL)

Query APIs MAY support Resource Query Language (RQL, <https://github.com/persvr/rql/>) queries against their API resources where the 'rql' trait is specified in the RAML documentation. A 501 HTTP status code MUST be returned where a RAML query is attempted using RQL functions or operators which are not supported by a Query API.

RQL SHOULD be formatted in the normalised form as opposed to using FIQL syntax, and passed via the query string using '?query.rql=...'.

Querying within objects and arrays SHOULD be performed as in the Basic Queries case by using the '.' separator.

When an RQL query is specified, the Basic Queries format MAY be ignored in order to simplify implementation.

Note that as RQL permits the definition of very complex queries, the server MAY return a 400 error code to indicate that it is refusing to action the client's request due to the query's complexity.

### Constraints

> Not all RQL operators will be suitable for use with a Query API. It is suggested that the following operators are supported, however these are not mandated and implementations MAY choose to support their own subset.

Reviewer: FWIW, I'm thinking about proposing a BCP that defines a useful RQL subset much more tightly.

Author: That would be a good thing. As things stand there is opportunity for non-interoperability here!

Author: See also #20

**Example 1: Simple Query**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/senders?query.rql=eq(transport,urn%3Ax-nmos%3Atransport%3Artp)
```

***Response***

- Returns all Sender objects which have an attribute 'transport' which exactly matches the string 'urn:x-nmos:transport:rtp'. This response matches that of 'Example 1' in basic querying.

**Example 2: Advanced Query**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/sources?query.rql=and(eq(format,urn%3Ax-nmos%3Aformat%3Avideo),in(tags.location,(Salford,London)))
```

***Response***

> - Returns all Sources which have a 'format' attribute equal to 'urn:x-nmos:format:video' AND a 'tags' attribute with a key of 'location', which has values of 'Salford' or 'London'.

Reviewer: Maybe we don't capitalize AND?

```suggestion
- Returns all Sources which have a 'format' attribute equal to 'urn:x-nmos:format:video' and a 'tags' attribute with a key of 'location', which has values of 'Salford' or 'London'.
```

- For each first generation ancestor found, the ID of these Sources is used to look up the next generation in the 'parents' arrays of further Sources.
- This process continues up to the generation limit returned in the X-Ancestry-Generations header. The server MAY refuse to honour a requested ''?query.ancestry_generations' value using a 400 error code if it is deemed to be too resource intensive.

***Notes***

- Responses SHOULD NOT include the Source with ID specified in the 'ancestry_id' parameter.

**Example 2: Parents Of A Flow**

***Request***

```http
GET /x-nmos/query/v1.1/flows?query.ancestry_id=ad14888a-3a98-444c-8aa8-4d87b77cbaa1&query.ancestry_type=parents&query.ancestry_generations=2
```

***Response***

Headers

```http
X-Ancestry-Generations: 2
```

Payload

- Returns Flows which are listed in the 'parents' array of the Flow identified by the ID 'ad14888a-3a98-444c-8aa8-4d87b77cbaa1'. These are the first generation parents.
- For each first generation parent found, their 'parents' array is used to identify the next generation of parents to be returned.

> - This process continues up to the generation limit returned in the X-Ancestry-Generations header (in this case limited to 2 by a query parameter). The server MAY refuse to honour a requested ''?query.ancestry_generations' value using a 400 error code if it is deemed to be too resource intensive.

Reviewer: Is that repeated single quote intended?

Author: Probably not,  and maybe we should move to back-ticks for this sort of thing anyway as we've done in more recent specs.

> - This process continues up to the generation limit returned in the X-Ancestry-Generations header (in this case limited to 2 by a query parameter). The server MAY refuse to honour a requested ''?query.ancestry_generations' value using a 400 error code if it is deemed to be too resource intensive.

Author: ```suggestion
- This process continues up to the generation limit returned in the X-Ancestry-Generations header (in this case limited to 2 by a query parameter). The server MAY refuse to honour a requested '?query.ancestry_generations' value using a 400 error code if it is deemed to be too resource intensive.
```

Reviewer: Resolved in backticks child PR.
